While an experiment is running,
you'll probably be tempted at some point to take a peek at how it's going.
If you see from that peak that the experiment is going well,
you might then be tempted to just end the experiment
early and deploy the tested changes right away.
It's important to resist these temptations since
this peaking will increase your overall error rate.
Take for example, a case where you analyze the data in two places,
once at the halfway point,
and once at the end of the scheduled runtime.
Let's run a bunch of simulations for outcomes under the null hypothesis.
If we used a five percent significance level at each checkpoint,
then it's not too surprising that about five percent of
the simulations get marked as statistically significant at each one.
That's a natural outcome of our type one error rate.
However, less than two percent of all the tests are
statistically significant at both the halfway point,
and at the end.
Most of the simulations that were statistically significant at
the halfway point would end up non-significant at the end.
If we decided to stop the experiment early
from seeing a significant difference at the halfway point,
then we would end up with an overall error rate around 8.6 percent, not five percent.
That's not to say that we can't do a peek ahead to make an early decision,
we just need to account for it in our design.
If you're willing to wait,
there is some additional math for it,
you can find formulas and other resources to help you come up with
early stopping rules without compromising the integrity of your experimental design.